K8s naming convention rational and additional documentation (#2252)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/non-normative/k8s-naming.md

Reviewer: I think https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/2245 was proposing a general-purpose doc to track reasoning for all areas, so I'd suggest:
- renaming this to something like `naming-known-exceptions.md`
- adding one section like `Kubernetes naming exceptions`
- providing rationale (consistency with API)

Author: done

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: K8s naming
--->

# Kubernetes Naming Guidance

> When naming resource, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, **prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming** over certain Opentelemetry's naming conventions, as long as the resulting name is valid per the general naming rules.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When defining resource, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, use names that are consistent and align with the Kubernetes API naming.
```

OR

```suggestion
When naming resources, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming over the [general naming consideration](docs/general/naming.md) defined by semantic conventions, as long as the resulting name is valid per the general naming rules.
```

(please check the link before accepting, did not test it)

Author: The latest PR has the link. Resolving this comment. Lmk if you'd like to see any more edits.

**Rationale:**  

> Kubernetes users are accustomed to the single-word resource names used in the Kubernetes API (e.g., `replicaset`, `statefulset`, `daemonset`, `replicationcontroller`, `resourcequota`).  

Reviewer 2: You could start with this "rationale" first and then follow with the guidance. Then maybe you don't even need to explicitly call it as a rationale, as it will be just a natural read - k8s stuff are named like this, so in semconv we also recommend doing the same.

> Using the same names as the Kubernetes API makes it easier for users to map telemetry data to familiar Kubernetes concepts and commands (e.g., `kubectl get replicaset`).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Using the same names as the Kubernetes API makes it easier for users to map telemetry data to familiar Kubernetes concepts and commands (e.g., `kubectl get replicaset`).  
```

This approach avoids ambiguity and reduces the need to decide when to split or join words with underscores, which can be inconsistent.

- For new attributes, **prefer the single-word form** as used in the Kubernetes API.
- **Short-form names (abbreviations) should be avoided** unless they are widely recognized in the Kubernetes community (e.g., `hpa` for HorizontalPodAutoscaler).

**Examples:**

```text

> Use:    k8s.replicaset.uid           (not k8s.replica_set.uid)
> Use:    k8s.resourcequota.uid         (not k8s.resource_quota.uid)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use:    k8s.replicaset.uid           (not k8s.replica_set.uid)
Use:    k8s.resourcequota.uid   (not k8s.resource_quota.uid)
```

OCD kicked in 😅

Author: Latest changes have correct alignment. Resolving this.

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: K8s naming
--->

> # Kubernetes Naming Guidance

Reviewer: could you please add a link to this doc with 1-liner summary (like "k8s conventions ) to the https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/9cc9f96a588fc1b6644aae957fb4a73fd23e10c9/docs/general/naming.md?plain=1#L74-L76?

Something along the lines of:

> Known exceptions include [K8s API names](todo link) where single word is used for consistency with the instrumented API.

Author: added

Kubernetes users are accustomed to the single-word resource names used in the Kubernetes API (e.g., `replicaset`, `statefulset`, `daemonset`, `replicationcontroller`, `resourcequota`). Using these same names in telemetry data makes it easier for users to map the data to familiar Kubernetes concepts and commands (e.g., `kubectl get replicaset`).

This naming style avoids ambiguity, and reduces the need to decide when to split or join words with underscores, which can lead to inconsistencies.

> When naming resources, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming over the [general naming considerations](../general/naming.md), as long as the resulting name adheres to the general naming rules.

Reviewer: I believe we're switching to entities term everywhere

```suggestion
When naming entities, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming over the [general naming considerations](../general/naming.md), as long as the resulting name adheres to the general naming rules.
```

cc @jsuereth

> When naming resources, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming over the [general naming considerations](../general/naming.md), as long as the resulting name adheres to the general naming rules.

Author: The exception applies only to Kubernetes API object names (e.g., replicaset, resourcequota), not to fields, which may use underscores. Use the exact single-word form from the Kubernetes API for k8s resource names when mapping 1:1; otherwise, follow the general naming rules. The official list of API object names can be found in the [Kubernetes API reference](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.33/) doc.

cc: @open-telemetry/semconv-k8s-approvers lmk if we have any concerns about ^. I'll update the guidance with this clarification.

> When naming resources, attributes, or metrics related to Kubernetes objects, prioritize consistency with Kubernetes API naming over the [general naming considerations](../general/naming.md), as long as the resulting name adheres to the general naming rules.

Author: We discussed this in SIG k8s semconv meeting today. For field names, we'll try to follow the general. conventions. Some examples we discussed during the call are field names which have dashes in k8s spec, e.g. `ephemeral-storage` -> `ephemeral_storage` and long field names which can be confusing to read are with underscores.

## Naming Recommendations

> - **Use single-word forms**: Follow the single-word naming style used in the Kubernetes API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Follow the naming style used in the Kubernetes API and CLI. This includes using single-word forms when such form is commonly used 
```

> - **Avoid short-form abbreviations**: Use abbreviations only if they are widely recognized in the Kubernetes community (e.g., `hpa` for HorizontalPodAutoscaler, which is also a valid short form in `kubectl`).

Reviewer: I believe this is exactly the same as in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/naming.md#name-abbreviation-guidelines and there is no need to duplicate it

Author: sounds good, removed
